created:: [[2022-07-14]]
up:: [[Cognitive Psych - PSYCHX170]]
tags:: #psychx170 #assignment 
***
# Models of Semantic Processing

This module's lectures note that we will never arrive at a point where we can construct a map of the brain that perfectly associates semantic knowledge at the neuronal level. However, I don't think that level of specificity will be required for neuroscientists and psychologists to form a more encompassing, satisfactory model of semantic processing. I expect that neuroscience will aid us in forming a semantic processing model that is more unified rather than proving one existing model to be "correct."  That is, I view the challenge for neuroscience and psychology as producing a model that specifies which processes are used in which contexts and how the existing models work together.

For example, research by Collins and Quillian (1969) provides evidence for a hierarchically organized memory structure. Response times seem to reflect some truth in the assumptions that concepts are stored at different levels and that it takes additional effort to retrieve and compare features of those concepts at different levels.  However, the hierarchical network model doesn't account for the typicality effect or a reversal of the category-size effect. 

Those two cases, however, can be accounted for by the feature comparison model. The typicality effect and reversal of the category-size effect can both be accounted for because feature similarity, not category size or location, is primary to the model. In turn, the feature comparison model falters in places where the hierarchical network doesn't. Specifically, all classifications do not require computation--at least not the same amount as an initial classification--and not all category members strictly adhere to necessary, defining features.

It's unlikely that humans are only using one or the other model. It's also unlikely that *when* these models are deployed is arbitrary or coincidental. Rather, I expect that future models will point to the contexts in which these processes are utilized individually or in parallel when we are asked, for example, "Is a whale a mammal?". 

The spreading activation model does allow for feature matching and introduces link-length as an abstraction of relatedness. Both of these characteristics can help address lapses in the theories above; however, the model is also faulted for having less predictive power and engaging too many flexible assumptions. 

Personally, the semantic activation model does offer me a good visualization of semantic relationships. Nodes and links are fairly easy to grok. However, there is a glaring problem with the semantic activation model that goes beyond methodological critique: not all stored knowledge is amodal, abstracted from our sensory experience. The chapter offers evidence from Barsalou (1999), Zwaan & Yaxley (2003), and others, but one of the lecture examples made this immediately apparent. When asked to consider the _word_ "blue", my mind did start surfacing amodal semantic associations. However, it also began surfacing plenty of sensory knowledge: the hue itself, a visual image of the word, even feelings of coolness. In order to satisfactorily account for this knowledge and the results in the research mentioned above, a unified model would need to incorporate the perceptual symbols model or similar. In short, a unified model will need to account for both amodal and modal knowledge.

In closing, I'd like to reiterate one point and directly answer another. First, I do not assume that a unified theory is one that attempts to force these differing research results into one tidy framework--a "fixed" hierarchical network model for example. Rather, I hope for something more along the lines of a schema of schemas that can point to when, why, and how qualitatively distinct organizational processes are activated and integrated. Second, for the sake of thoroughly answering the prompt, I believe something akin to the integrated semantic network presented by Gorodetsky & Fisher (1996) would be the most "correct" or often used of the current models. This model includes both modal and amodal information _and_ accounts for links having distinct relationships as with Holley, et al (1979) (e.g., "part of", "characteristic of", "leads to", etc.). It's not the unified field theory of semantic processing, but it's the most encompassing so far.