created:: [[2022-07-21]]
up:: [[Cognitive Psych - PSYCHX170]]
tags:: #psychx170 #assignment 
***
>In the video interview for this module, there was considerable talk about the topic of Alzheimer’s disease. Your task in this written assignment is to search for a link between the dementia produced by this disease—or any other disease/disorder that causes dementia—and language. Be sure to explain your findings through the context of topics covered in this module’s presentations and terminology.

# Alzheimer's Disease and Language

While the interview doesn't touch on the subject too deeply, Dr. Mormino offers an essential link between the progression of Alzheimer's and language: the location of the disease within the brain. Previously, it wasn't possible to observe this spread directly. Even confirming the diagnosis was impossible until after the patient's death, as it required surgical samples to be taken. However, modern PET scans now allow us to track where both tau and amyloid proteins are building up within the brain. I believe this is important for research and clinical care.

This link is similar to Broca and Wernicke's findings in the 19th century. Broca and Wernicke were able to associate particular symptoms with localized damage to the brain. This association allowed for identifying distinct language centers for handling syntax (Broca's area) and semantics (Wernicke's area) based on the associated changes in linguistic function. Dr. Mormino noted that concentrations of dementia-related proteins in these areas are associated with differing symptoms. For example, it should be possible to predict that high concentrations of tau or amyloid proteins in Broca's area correlate with syntactical problems when producing speech. 

Observing locations affected by the disease and identifying language centers allows us to explain why early language-related symptoms characterize certain types of dementia. Frontotemporal dementia, for example, is often accompanied by difficulties in processing and producing speech when presenting in the left hemisphere. Other types of dementia may introduce communication issues much later in the progression, via related damage (i.e., if neurons containing semantic knowledge are compromised), or via ancillary degradation (i.e., if behavioral or emotional symptoms make communication challenging).

I'm optimistic about what this means regarding research. Two hundred years ago, Broca and Wernicke were able to identify distinct language centers using rudimentary technology and astute observation. Modern PET scans allow us to make similar observations with higher precision--and without waiting for an accidental brain trauma to clarify the location. One area that appears full of possibilities is applying similar strategies to non-verbal communication. In addition to our technological advances, new theoretical models like embodied cognition and perceptual symbol systems present modern researchers with more "targets" to look for when associating symptoms with disease location. Advances in identifying non-verbal communication centers seem particularly relevant to dementia, as many patients remain responsive to non-verbal cues even when verbal language has become difficult or impossible. 

In addition to improving our neurological understanding of language, this predictive power is also a powerful tool for clinical care. Not only can clinicians confirm an Alzheimer's diagnosis while a patient is alive, but they may also be able to predict which symptoms are most likely based on the location of the disease. For example, being able to tell a patient and their caregiver(s) which types of communication may be compromised and when provides a significant advantage when constructing a care plan.  